---
layout: post
title:  "jClouds"
date:   2011-07-04 12:00:00
disqus_id: "461 "
---

Clouds is a jQuery plugin that displays clouds moving across a sky. It comes preconfigured with an
image map of clouds but can be used with a custom image map of anything you please, limited only by
your imagination. Why not try flying farm animals?

<script type="text/javascript" src="https://code.jquery.com/jquery-1.11.3.min.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/2011-06-04-jclouds/jquery.clouds-0.2.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">
    $(document).ready(function(){
        
        $('#clouds').clouds({
                            xmlMap: '{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/2011-06-04-jclouds/clouds.xml',
                            bobHeight: 0,
                            speed: 20
                            });
                            
        $('#clouds').clouds({
                            xmlMap: '{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/2011-06-04-jclouds/misc.xml',
                            cloudCount: 1,
                            bobHeight: 10
                            });
    });
</script>
<div id="clouds" style="position:relative; background-color: #1E90FF; overflow: hidden; height:200px; width: 100%; border-radius: 7px; margin-bottom: 2em;"></div>

Clone from [GitHub](https://github.com/cavaliercoder/jquery.clouds).

## Features

* Uses an image map rather than seperate image files for optimum performance
* Clean markup. No additional divs or img tags required. Just one div container
* Customizable image map via XML file
* Support inline content if preferred
* Customizable animation parameters including speed, density and bobbing
* Multiple instances per page or per container
* Cross Browser compatible
* Adjustable Frame-Per-Second for quality vs. performance adjustments
* Smart clipping prevents messy overflow as clouds transition past the container's bounds.
* JSLint verified.
* Compatability


Testing has been completed with IE6.0+, Firefox 2+, Safari 4+ and Opera 10 using jQuery 1.3+.

## Installation

Load jQuery and jQuery.Clouds into your page:

{% highlight html %}
<script type="text/javascript" src="http://code.jquery.com/jquery-1.6.2.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript" src="jquery.clouds.js"></script>
{% endhighlight %}

Attach Clouds to a container:

{% highlight javascript %}
$(document).ready(function({
    $('#myContainer').jClouds();
});
{% endhighlight %}

## Configuration

The following options are available when executing the script:

__xmlMap__ [Default: 'clouds.xml']

URL of the image map XML file, relative to the script. If none provided, inline content (ie. the
container's children) will be converted to clouds instead.

__cloudCount__ [Default: 20]

The number of clouds displayed at random in the selected container.

__speed__ [Default: 40]

The speed (pixels per second) at which the clouds move.

__speedVariation__ [Default: 0.33]

The maximum random variation from 'speed' of each cloud, expressed as fraction of 1.

A speed variation of 0 will result in all clouds traveling at the same speed.

A speed variation of 0.5 will result in some clouds traveling 1.5x faster than the configured
`speed`.

A speed variation of 1 will result in some clouds traveling 2x faster than the configured `speed`
and some standing still. Not recommended.

__bobHeight__ [Default 3]

The height in pixels that each cloud will bob. Set to `0` to disable bobbing

__bobWidth__ [Default 20]

The width in pixels that each cloud will pass in one bob

__fps__ [Default: 25]

The Frame-Per-Second of the animation. Higher settings produce smoother results but can affect
browser performance.

__clipLeft__ [Default: false]

Clouds are clipped at the left of their container.

__clipRight__ [Default: false]

Clouds are clipped at the right of their container.

__clipBottom__ [Default: false]

Clouds are clipped at the bottom of their container.

__clipTop__ [Default: false]

Clouds are clipped at the top of their container.

Configuration settings can be set when executing the script on your container as follows:

{% highlight javascript %}
$(document).ready(function(){
    $('#myContainer').clouds({
        xmlMap: 'clouds.xml',
        cloudCount: 25,
        speed: 20,
        speedVariation: 0.33,
        fps: 25,
        clipBottom: false,
        clipTop: true
    });
});

{% endhighlight %}

## Image Map

The Image map XML file should define the URL of the image to use and the coordinates of each sprite
(cloud) on the image.

It must have a root element named `clouds` with an attribute named `src` pointing to the image file.

The root element should contain children named `cloud` with the attributes `width`, `height`, `left`
and `top` defining the coordinates of each sprite as integers.

This is the default image map file:

{% highlight html %}
<clouds src="clouds.png">
    <cloud left="0" top="0" width="176" height="68" />
    <cloud left="176" top="0" width="194" height="69" />
    <cloud left="0" top="68" width="142" height="67" />
    <cloud left="142" top="69" width="201" height="67" />
    <cloud left="0" top="135" width="106" height="50" />
    <cloud left="106" top="137" width="93" height="46" />
    <cloud left="199" top="136" width="115" height="65" />
    <cloud left="0" top="185" width="77" height="34" />
    <cloud left="77" top="184" width="122" height="43" />
    <cloud left="199" top="201" width="47" height="22" />
    <cloud left="251" top="201" width="58" height="29" />
</clouds>
{% endhighlight %}

## Features in development

jClouds is no longer in development, however pull requests are welcome on
[GitHub](https://github.com/cavaliercoder/jquery.clouds).

## Change Log

* 30/08/2015 v0.3.0 Re-released on GitHub
* 07/08/2011 v0.2.0 Significant performance improvements
* 04/07/2011 v0.1.0 Initial release.
