---
layout: post
title:  "The Goal: A challenge to IT Operations"
---

This week I took an adventure in 1980's manufacturing plant optimization in
Eliyahu M. Goldratt's "[The Goal: A process of ongoing
improvement](http://www.amazon.com /The-Goal-Process-Ongoing-
Improvement/dp/0884270610)". The book is featured in discussions around DevOps,
particularly concerning its heavy reference in Kim, Behr and Stafford's [The
Phoenix Project](http://itrevolution.com/books/phoenix-project-devops-book/) and
all things Lean.

It was an unusual read for me but has certainly changed the way I approach
problems in IT operations and even in getting my daughter to school on time.

In this post, I'll aim to condense some of the principals taught in the book,
their application in DevOps and finally offer a challenge to IT organizations
where application deployment is *not* the primary line of business

## Summary

_The Goal_ is a fictional business parable that follows Alex Rogo, a
manufacturing plant manager at UniCo maufacturing. His plant (and the business
as a whole) are deep in the red, despite employing some of the best management
wizardry of cost cutting exercises, order expedition, localised optimizations
and even fancy new robots.

Alex has a chance meeting with a physics professor, Jonah, from his university
days, who challenges some of Alex's (and my own) most basic assumptions about
productivity and the reason the business exists at all. Jonah leads Alex, via
provocative Socratic inquiry, to approach his manufacturing and personal issues
scientifically.

The result for Alex was saving the business and some general kickassery.

I was surprised how entertaining the book was. For me the subject matter of the
plant was fairly foreign and uninteresting but the story telling is very human
and relatable.

Manufacturing jargon is kept to a minimum, with only enough detail given to
solidify some of the abstract ideas being taught.

The book didn't feel dated at all. The only reminder that we are not in the
current millenium is the mention of dot-matrix printers and smoking in the
office.

Being a work of fiction, I did doubt whether the scale of some of the successes
encountered in the book could be replicated in reality. While the turnaround of
the fictional UniCo is extreme, the common-sense nature of the science described
lends credibility. Fortunately for us, there is now also a long history of well
published successes and failures with Eliyahu's process and similar ideas from
DevOps, the Toyota Production System or Lean manufacturing.


## Socratic inquiry

All of the lessons taught in the book could be condensed into a two or three
page cheat sheet; even with substantial context. Unfortunately, some of the
lessons are so contrary to our modus operandi that in this form they would read
as nonsense; much like the notion of the world being round once did.

For example, Jonah suggests that _most_ efficiencies gained in local areas of
production actually serve to cripple the entire system, contrary to my
intuition.

The beauty of the relationship between Jonah and Alex, is that Jonah never
provides answers to anything. He only provides questions and validation of
Alex's assertions. In doing so, much like the the Greek philosopher
[Socrates](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socratic_method), Jonah teaches Alex
how to think. Essentially, Jonah could give Alex a fish and feed him for a day,
but instead teaches Alex how to fish, so Alex can own his own destiny.

This form of dialog caused me to continually consider my own situation. Clearly
the nuances of manufacturing do not directly apply to IT operations, so some of
the answers Alex discovers have no relevance to me (I don't use heat treat ovens
in the datacenter). Instead the challenges Jonah offers to my assumptions and
way of thinking lead me to answers of my own.


## The goal

The first question Jonah poses to Alex is "What is the goal"? In my position in
IT Operations, I might have answered "uptime" or "minimizing costs" or
"information security" or "good customer service". Jonah highlights that these
sorts of answers are actually just a means to an end, not the end itself.

For UniCo manufacturing, the _end_, or the goal, is to make money. I work for an
outsourcing company, who have assigned me to a government body concerned with
education. For me the goal is little unclear, so I'll give it some more thought
and perhaps conversation with the powers-at-be. Is the goal to make money for my
employer? Or to improve education for my client? Or to make money for my
employer by improving education for my client? Or is the goal to assist the
current government in winning the next election (not educational outcomes) so we
can keep the client and continue to make money?

The point is, without clarity on the goal, you might unwittingly work to
undermine it. For example, UniCo purchased new welding robots that improved
local efficiency, but actually impacted negatively on their goal; to make money.

Once the goal is clear, Alex devises a succinct list of critical measures
of progress towards the goal which are used to classify everything in the plant:

* __Throughput__: the rate at which the system generates money though completed
  sales
* __Inventory__: the money currently invested in assets it intends to sell
  (unfinished products, work-in-process, etc.)
* __Operational expenses__: money spent to turn inventory into throughput
  (wages, power, etc.)

These measures are specific to UniCo's goal of making money through
manufacturing but could be abstracted to other applications.

For example in education, throughput might be the number of student who graduate
and proceeed into successful workplacements, inventory might be the number of
students currently in the system and operational expenses remain; the cost of
employing staff and keeping the lawns.


## Dependent events, statistical fluctuations

Jonah highlights that a manufacturing plant represents a sequence (or many
sequences) of dependent events. Meaning, some events cannot happen until
preceding events have completed. E.g. assembly cannot begin until all required
parts have arrived. Each step in the process is also subject to statistical
fluctuations; where the duration of each execution of a discrete process will
fluctuate. Welding or painting a part, will always vary in time.

This is fairly self-evident, and like me, Alex assumes that the _average_
execution time of each production line station will determine the throughput of
the system (i.e. time from customer order to dispatch and receipt). In practice
however, the plant is failing to keep up and the issue is compounding over time.

While hiking a group of scouts in single file through a nature trail, Alex
becomes frustrated that the group of boys cannot seem to stay together and are
running behind time to complete the hike. Alex identifies that the hike is much
like his plant:

* there is a goal: everyone arriving on time, all together
* one boy cannot move forward until the next boy has moved forward
* each step of each boy fluctuates in distance and duration
* the distance covered by the last hiker is the throughput of the system
* the energy expended is the operational expense of the system
* the distance between the first and last hiker, is the inventory or
  work-in-process.

Much like the factory, the work-in-process is in continual growth, with the
distance between front and back of the line constantly expanding, increasing
risk and the energy required to compensate for the distance.

Alex's expectation was that the average pace of the boy scouts would determine
the arrival time. Instead he discovers, that it's actually the maximum
accumulated, negative deviation from the average that determines the throughput
(arrival time) and inventory (distance between front and back) of the group.

Each step that each boy takes will deviate slightly from the average. Every time
a deviation is in the negative (slightly slower), that deviation accumulates as
the boys behind cannot pass and slow down. Additionally the distance between the
hiker in front increases. Compensating for this phenomena, requires significant
effort and is often outside the capacity of the boys.

Alex further models the problem by passing matches along a sequence of bowls,
based on the fluctating rolls of a dice. The throughput of the last bowl is
significantly lower than anticipated.

This misconception about the capacity of the hikers being based on average pace
is shared at the UniCo plant and in my own estimation.

## The illusion of local efficiency

What Alex learns (and Jonah later validates) is that the whole process is
actually hinged on the bottleneck (or constraint), the slowest boy scout hiker.
Alex forces all of the boys to maintain pace with the slowest boy, young Herbie,
by placing Herbie at the front of the pack. As a result, the boys behind start
operating below capacity which in turn leads to the entire pack walking closely
together (a reduciton in inventory or work-in-process). The boys are no longer
required to jog to catch up the gaps between them and so operational expenditure
is reduced.

Now that Herbie is setting the pace for the group, his capacity gets greater
scrutiny and the group realize Herbie is carrying several kilos of obscure
camping equipment in his ruck sack. The equipment (or load) is distributed
amongst the boys with higher capacity and suddenly the entire group is moving
quicker (throughput)!

Prior to understanding this metaphore, I might have hinged the success of the
group on the fastest kids (highest capacity resources). Ultimately, any
efficiency gained in the faster boys (strength, speed, etc.) is a complete and
utter waste when considering the goal of arriving on time and together.

Likewise, the robots purchased by UniCo were a waste. Because of their
impressive capacity, they only served to increase inventory (by piling up
products in front of the next work station) and operational cost (staff working
overtime to catch up). The robots did increase the local efficiency of their work
centers, but undermined the goal of the company, to make money, by increasing
inventory and operational expenditure without increasing throughput of the
entire system.


## The process of ongoing improvements

The author provides a process to solve these problems, which in the parable, is
devised by Alex and his team of colleagues. This is the process Alex used to
recitify the hiking boy scouts, and his manufacturing plant woes:

1. Identify the system's primary bottleneck/s (Herbie, or the plant's heat treat
   machine)
2. Decide how to exploit the bottleneck (move Herbie to the front or keep the
   heat treat machine running during lunch breaks)
3. Subordinate everything else to the above decision (all kids slow down to
   Herbie's pace and all other workstations prioritise parts bound for the heat
   treat machine and remain idle if there are sufficient parts ready)
4. Elevate the system's constraints (distribute the contents of Herbie's
   rucksack or install additional heat treat machines)
5. If a bottleneck is broken (i.e. no longer the bottleneck) repeat from step 1,
   but don't allow inertia to become a constraint (in this case, market demand
   became the new bottleneck for Alex's plant, but inertia caused them to
   stockpile too many completed products)


## Change

Once the manufacturing plant is once again profitable, Alex faces the challenge
of responding to changes in the marketplace and planning ahead to prevent any
further decline. With further prompting from his mentor Jonah, Alex determines
there are three critical challenges for managers in applying his new learnings:

* What needs to change?
* What does it need to change __to__?
* How do you execute the change?

These steps are particularly critical when approaching changes to the most
difficult of all business resources to manage: people. When trying to change
the culture, values and thinking of people, the book highlights two important
strategies:

* Socratic inquiry: leading people to answers by simply invoking curiosity.
  Alex did this by sharing Jonah's questions with his colleagues and working
  together to find the answers.

* The scientific method: create a hypothesis, A/B test the hypothesis (with a
  control) and share the conclusion. Alex did this by comparing the results of
  his hypothesis to the results attained in other UniCo plants, or simply with
  "before and after" results.


## Contribution to DevOps

Prior to reading this book and The Phoenix Project, I would have described
DevOps as:

	Enabling frequent production releases by making developers and sysadmins
	play nice together and using some cool new automation tool chains.

I now have a completely different perspective. In fact, the cooperative culture
and tools have taken a heavy dive in significance for me. They are simply a
means to an end. They were a tailored response to a discrete problem. Truth is,
in my own experience in adopting ["DevOps"](https://www.scriptrock.com/devops-
in-a-box), the CI/CD (Continuous Integration/Continuous Delivery) tools simply
became the overpriced, under performing, state-of- the-art, highly "efficient"
robots in Alex's manufacturing plant.

CI/CD tools and DevOps culture were born from a specific problem. That is, that
successful implementations of Agile development methodologies have significantly
increased the production capacity of development teams, typically without
exceeding marketplace demand. Historically, operations teams held the title of
"most efficient" as software releases were infrequent. Now the tables have
turned and operations has become a bottleneck in businesses acheiving their
primary goal; make money first, fast and forever.

DevOps addresses this problem, using Goldratt's principals in the following
ways:

* Production deployment is identified as the bottlneck in achieving the goal
* The bottleneck is "exploited" in that more frequent releases keep operations
  functioning at full capacity. Operational activities that don't directly
  progress the goal are deprioritised.
* Work is buffered in front of the bottleneck using "feature toggles" that
  operations can enable via configuration when ready
* Testing and quality assurance are moved before the bottleneck using Continuous
  Integration and automated testing tools. This elevates the bottleneck by
  preventing it from processing defective goods (i.e. buggy software)
* Batch sizes are reduced, increasing the work of the testing, packaging and
  release work centers, but increasing flow through the bottleneck (smaller
  changes, lower risk, easier planning, etc.)
* Automation is used to elevate the operations bottleneck. E.g. one touch
  deployments, infrastructure as code, containers, etc.
* As bottlenecks are defeated (i.e. ops can keep up with dev), other bottlenecks
  (prioritised according to the goal) are identified and attacked such as
  operational outages, technical debt, infrastructure projects, compliance
  problems, etc.


## Application in IT Operations

Deploying applications into production is actually a very small part of what my
organisation does. Our focus is more in service desk, process management and
infrastructure services.

Essentially, CI/CD is of very little (if any) value to us in achieving our
goals. For this reason, often my colleagues express that DevOps is also of very
little use to us. Eliyahu's parable illustrates that the Theory of Constraints,
a core component of DevOps thinking, is actually more relevant than ever; it's
just that the application will look different to CI/CD.

Our goal, hyperthetically, is to make money. We do this by increasing throughput
(projects delivered, requests fulfilled, etc.) while minimizing operational
expenses and inventory (incomplete works).

Our bottleneck is not the frequent deployment of new software features. What we
need to determine, is where the primary bottleneck is in acheiving our goal.
Hyperthetically, it could be:

* Service outages
* Change and release management
* Skills shortages
* Quality assurance
* Inter-team politics
* Project delivery
* Etc.

Improving any one of these in isolation could actually serve to undermine our
goal by increasing inventory or operational expenses, without increasing
throughput.

The next step, the challenge to you and hopefully the subject of a future
article, is the application of Goldratt's process of ongoing improvement to 
more diverse IT Operations organisations and overcoming the challenges of
organisational change.
