---
layout: post
title:  "Boiling Frogs"
---

https://github.com/GovernmentCommunicationsHeadquarters/BoilingFrogs

http://blog.gardeviance.org/2014/03/on-mapping-and-evolution-axis.html

## Pg. 2

> ...changes may need to be considered together to achieve systemic improvement
rather than localised changes.

> Part of the point of embracing this kind of change is that there isn’t an end
state because change is constant.

## Pg. 3

> In order to maintain competitive advantage, old ways of working for our
more predictable solutions are no longer appropriate when we need to create new
value by working on speculative, creative solutions.

## Pg. 5

> The story goes that if a frog is placed in a saucepan of cold water, which is
slowly heated, the frog adapts its body temperature to the changing heat of the
water and gradually goes to sleep. In fact, it goes to sleep at 40 ᵒC, unaware
that at 100 ᵒC it boils alive. However, if the frog is placed in already boiling
water it immediately jumps out to safety.

> This is a useful metaphor to illustrate that although humans think they are
very clever at adapting to the changing world, they don’t necessarily recognise
the need to jump out of that world and take charge of it, not just adapt to it.
There is a risk of being blissfully unaware that the world is changing so
dramatically that there is danger of boiling alive whilst asleep.

## Pg. 6

> The technological environment is now moving too quickly for us to take years
building big solutions.


## Pg. 7

> Creation of a high number of roles, job descriptions, process and structures
that are organised around the way we've *provided* value not the actual *value*
that we provide.

> Organisation of people around existing products, capabilities and process, not
by the skill & expertise they provide.

>  ...focusing on inward pressures and thinking about how to improve the things
we currently do, rather than the value we need to provide. This is why so many
people miss the need to change radically.

## Pg. 9

> To survive rapid disruption technical businesses and organisations need to do
less of some of the “old” ways of working and move towards doing more of the
“new” ways of working...

## Pg. 12

> [on process handoffs] ...This kind of structured process is a primary
impediment to business agility in many organisations, effectively negating any
benefits of agility gained by product delivery teams. 

> Attempting to apply a single form of working (e.g. classic Project Management
or Emergent Agile Architecture) across all areas, as a single predefined
structure simply does not work.

> It is much better to allow project teams to form structure temporarily to suit
the group’s needs rather than having automatically invoked predefined
structures.

> Forward leaning organisations need less structure not more. You don’t make
work faster, better, cheaper or happier by adding more layers of management.

## Pg. 13

> Using the hybrid dynamic model organisations can have multiple operating
models co-existing harmoniously within a single enterprise portfolio in an
organisation.

## Pg. 14

> Organisations should adopt the general principle that the default starting
point is the smallest operating structure possible and only increase the
structural complexity as and when it becomes necessary.

## Pg. 15

> Where co-location is not possible, or complexity requires the power of a crowd
or networked ecosystem, then communities can be brought together by
collaboration technology and open source ways of working.

> The industry needs to develop a culture of “Customer Obsession” where teams
and individuals throughout the organisation understand who their true customers
and stakeholders are and work to deliver value to the point of service.

## Pg. 16

> Unfortunately, when badly applied, both approaches [Agile and Lean] can mask
the customer proxy problem rather than solve it, further extending the cone of
uncertainty and moving delivery risk into the business rather than reducing it.

> Businesses may feel that they cannot afford for their operational business
personnel to be spending a good proportion of their time involved in software
development. In reality these organisations cannot afford not to spend time
ensuring their software investment is directed properly, resulting in real
business value.

> The industry needs less Project and Programme Managers, less plans and
documentation, less abstract architecture, less bureaucracy, less process and
less structure.

## Pg. 17

> The technology business needs less passive plan followers and more active
problem solvers.


## Pg. 21

> Analytical focus can often lead to knowing the cost of everything and the
value of nothing.

## Pg. 22

> Less time needs to be spent “learning to plan” and with more time “planning
to learn”.

## Pg. 23

> Separate business and technical areas make a collaborative focus on customer
business value difficult as everyone thinks various parts of the equation
“aren’t their job”. This mentality leads to transactional waterfall behaviours,
which impede collaboration.


## Pg. 24

> Above all people need to be skilled in collaboration and communication.

> Today’s organisations need people with a deep understanding of technology,
software development and how that can be applied in the context of business
strategy and business goals.


